## Question 9

### What is SQL, what is MySQL/MariaDB and what are they used for?

---

**SQL** stands for *Structured Query Language*.

It is a language that is used to interact directly with a **Relational Database Management System (RMDBS)**. Most Relational Database systems use SQL ([week 6 notes](https://github.com/senecawebprogramming/web306-day6-databases-sql-web306/blob/master/web306-day6-databases-sql-handout.pdf)) It is known to be a non-precedural language (or a declarative language) where the user specifies no details on how to execute a command. These kinds of languages are known as [*Fourth generation languages*](https://ict.senecacollege.ca/~ipc144/pages/content/compi.html#gen).

This language is standardized by ANSI (American National Standards Institute) and ISO(International Organization for Standardization) ([slide 22 of this powerpoint - Cengage Learning](refs/normalization.ppt). 

We use **SQL** to perform the following operations:

- DML (Data Manipulation Language) - Interactions with data within a database (AKA. CRUD statements).
  - INSERT
  - SELECT
  - UPDATE
  - DELETE
- DDL (Data Definition Language) - Used when modifying the structure of the database.
  - CREATE
  - ALTER
  - DROP
- DCL (Data Control Language) - Implement access control to specific parts of a database.
  - Grant
  - Revoke
- Transaction Control statements 
  - COMMIT
  - ROLLBACK
  - SAVEPOINT

Source: [Types of SQL statements](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nFYg9-LxFeo)

Note: These are common operations within the **SQL** standard there are far more.

**MySQL/MariaDB** - open source implementation of a Relational Database Management System as well as the SQL standard (various implementations offer their own exclusive features). Their particular implementation of SQL is used to interact with their database management system.

