## Question 4

> What is Composer and what is it used for in relation to PHP and Laravel specifically?

Composer is a command line dependancy manager for php developers. Dependancy managers in general facilitate [automatic installation, deletion, and upgrading](https://github.com/senecawebprogramming/web306-day8-composer-libraries-web306/blob/master/web306-day8-composer-libraries-handout.pdf) of dependancies. 

Dependancies in general are libraries (also referred to as APIs) a project requires in order to operate. Since libraries are their own projects, they themselves are version controlled. Libraries may undergo changes that could range from being minor to being very drastic. Drastic changes come with possible side-effects that may cause existing software that used the library to no longer work ([Dependancy management](https://missing.csail.mit.edu/2020/metaprogramming/)). To recify this issue, project manangers/maintainers had to agree on a specific way to let users know when a drastic changes occur. [Semantic versioning](https://semver.org/) is the most popular specification. By having a standard way to express different versions of software, it becomes very easy to determine compatability. Composer and many other dependancy mangement tools for other languages use this to their advantage.

Composer (like many other dependancies managers) come with a configuration file. In the case of composer, it is a JSON file. This file specifies [criteria regarding the version the library](https://stackoverflow.com/a/39502171/14426824) that is required. The criteria is loosely specified with a *semantic version* and it states that we can use (quoted from the rust book):

> ["any version that has a public API compatible with \[the\] version \[specifed\]"](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch02-00-guessing-game-tutorial.html#using-a-crate-to-get-more-functionality)

A semantic version is [expressed with a '^' character prepended to the version](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch02-00-guessing-game-tutorial.html#using-a-crate-to-get-more-functionality). This system offers flexibility in allowing the dependancy manager to know when it needs to update the version while still remaining compatible.

Composer also has a lock file (composer.lock) which concerns the developers of that software. It represents the *exact versions* of the dependancies that are installed. Libraries themselves also have lock files but that does not concern users of the libraries (users only need to care about the JSON configuration file for their dependancies). Lock files are used as an indication to composer (and developers) that [*these versions of the dependancies will be guareenteed to work*](https://missing.csail.mit.edu/2020/metaprogramming/) with the project in its current state.

Composer, again like many other dependancy managers, allow for global installations of software written in that specific language. Installing with the global option makes composer behave not quite the same but similar to a system package manager like `apt`. It makes a program availiable as a standalone application. The Laravel framework is an example of software that [composer can install globally](https://laravel.com/docs/8.x/installation#installing-laravel) which may be used independantly of a php project. Laravel will appear to operate like any ordinary shell command allow you to issue commands (assuming it's part of your PATH) such as:

```bash
$ laravel new <project-name>
```

The Laravel installtion process involves [installing all of its dependancies](https://laravel.com/docs/8.x/installation#installing-laravel). This is done with composer using the same strategy as mentioned before (regarding sementic versioning). Laravel's developers used a specific version of each of their dependancies while developing. Composer takes responsibilty in ensuring that only compatible versions are installed when users create a new laravel project.
